Everything that I wish I knew when I started mountain biking.

1. It is very different from road biking. It is more technical, it is much easier to lose control and take a fall.

2. Look where you want to go, not at what you want to avoid. Looking at what you want to avoid will make you go directly at what you want to avoid.

3. Stay relaxed. Keep your mind and body relaxed. Have some bend in your elbows and knees.

4. Do not strangle the handle bar. Keep a firm yet easy grip; don't use a stranglehold.

5. Hover your straightened index fingers over the brakes. If you curl it, it is far to easy to yank your brakes, especially your front brakes. Abruptly applying a lot of pressure on the front brakes can easily send you over the bars.

6. Use your peripheral vision. Don't stare directly in front of your tire. Using your peripheral vision will give you greater view of the trail, especially with what's ahead. It will also keep you relaxed. The brain processes peripheral vision significantly faster than laser-focused vision.

7. Bike-body separation. When turning, especially on off camber turns, lean your bike and not your body. Keep your body centered over the bike. Bicycle tires have knobs that grip specifically when turning. Leaning the bike engages these grippy turning knobs. Bend your outside arm, extend your inside arm, point your head and inside knee towards the turn.

8. Ride out of the saddle for best control. Riding out of the saddle allows your body to adjust to the terrain whether it be a rock garden, sand or loose gravel, or ruts.

9. Lean forward when climbing steeper terrain. This will apply weight to the front tire keeping it planted on the ground and helping you control the bike.

10. Look at the exit when turning. When turning, especially tight turns or switchbacks, look at the exit, i.e. the end of the turn. This will force you to position your body towards the turn.

11. Keep pedalling when making slower turns. The gyroscope effect helps you stay balanced.

12. Roll over instead of trying to avoid or stear around most obstacles. You will be surprised at how many things you can simply roll over instead of trying to maneuver around obstancles. Just remember to stay calm and centered over your bike.

13. Lower your seat when descending and stay out of the saddle for greater control. Lowering your seat will allow you to center your weight over the bike when descending. On steeper terrain, you will have to push your bum towards the rear wheel to keep your weight centered and to keep you from going over the bars.

14. Keep your pedals level. This will help you avoid pedal strikes.

15. Drink plenty of fluids the day before a ride, as well as right before a ride. Drining right before you ride will help you stay hydrated and allow you to carry less water. If you drink enough, you will not have to drink for the first 45 minutes of your ride.

16. Wear elbow pads and knee pads, and the longest socks you can find.

17. Practice slow riding, maneuvering, turning even when not on the trails.

18. Keep your back flat and your elbows out. This puts you naturally in a good attack/ready position, pushes your bum to the rear, and gives you the most control of the handle bar.

19. Point your head and knee towards the direction of the turn.

20. Apply breaks before a feature, not during. A feature will often be a turn. If the turn has sand or loose gravel, breaking during the turn will surely cause you to skid.

21. Lean your body forward when turning. This will give you the most bite on the ground and result in greater control. The natural reaction is to lean back; leaning back can easily cause your front wheel to wash out and make you lose control.
